 ' ----------------------------------------------------------------
 ' PPRIMER.BAS (Printer Primer) by John Wolfskill
 ' Copyright (C) 1992 DOS Resource Guide
 ' Published in Issue #5, page 57.
 '
 ' Requirements: MS-DOS Qbasic or Microsoft QuickBasic 4.x
 '-----------------------------------------------------------------

==============================================================================

-------------
 PPRIMER.BAS
-------------
SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS:
The version of QBasic that comes with DOS 5 or later, or Microsoft Quick Basic 
4.x, and a printer connected to your computer's parallel printer port.

WHAT PPRIMER.BAS DOES:
This QBasic utility helps you tap most of your printer's special features 
while working at the DOS prompt. It lets you send as many as twelve 49-
character control strings to any printer, and it also provides a way to 
quickly set up your printer before you load software that doesn't understand 
printer control codes.

The program automatically saves your favorite printer setup strings in a data 
file, which allows you to quickly initialize your printer and change print 
modes, type styles, margin settings, and the like.

USING PPRIMER.BAS
To load the program, type QBASIC PPRIMER.BAS (using path names if necessary) 
at the DOS prompt. Next, turn on your printer and place it on line. Then, run 
the program by selecting the Start option in QBasic's Run menu, or press 
Shift-F5.

PPRIMER.BAS begins by displaying two blank boxes and three options: Assign, 
Send, and Quit. Choose option A to assign control strings to a particular 
keystroke. The Action box on the left lists twelve keys (A through L) that you 
may assign to a particular function. If, for example, you want to use the A 
key to put your printer in letter-quality mode and choose a sans serif 
typeface, select A again and type in a short description of the action, 
abbreviating as necessary. Then press Enter.

Next, press the A key and then the C key to assign a control sequence. Using 
your printer's manual as a reference, type in the proper control codes to get 
letter-quality mode and sans serif printing. Press Enter. Assign other actions 
and control strings in a similar manner.

To select a control string, choose option S from the main menu. Use the up- 
and down-arrow keys to position the cursor on the correct control code, then 
press Enter. (Pressing the correct letter also moves the cursor to the 
appropriate entry.)

To ensure that your control codes work as they should, PPRIMER.BAS lets you 
type in a text string to test your setup. Text strings must begin with the 
ASCII pound sign (#); otherwise the program doesn't recognize the information 
as a text string. The text must not include commas.

To use the text string to test your printer-control codes, first send the 
control string to the printer; then send the text string. PPRIMER.BAS strips 
off the initial pound signs and sends the text to the printer, printing it 
according to the specifications in the control string.

When you're satisfied that your printer is set up properly, quit the program 
by pressing Q. You then can use the DOS PRINT command to print a file using 
the correct margin settings, typeface, type size, and so on. You can also 
print from within application programs that do not automatically re-initialize 
the printer when they load. If you're trying to print from an application that 
performs its own printer setup, read the application's manual for directions 
on how to disable this feature.

For further information on PPRIMER.BAS and QBasic programming as it relates to 
PPRIMER.BAS, see "Programming From A to Z" (DRG #5, page 56), "The Importance 
of Good Thinking" (DRG #6, November 1992, page 61), "Building a Solid 
Foundation" (DRG #7, January 1993, page 57), and "Understanding the Keys to 
QBasic" (DRG #8, March 1993, page 51).
