' QWIPE.BAS
'   by Vincent D. O'Connor
' Copyright (C) 1994 DOS Resource Guide
' Published in Issue #17, September 1994 issue, page 67

***************************************************************************** 
 
 QWIPE.BAS 
   by Vincent D. O'Connor 
 Copyright (C) 1994 DOS Resource Guide 
 Published in Issue #17, September 1994 issue, page 67 
 
There are times when you may want to delete files so that they can't be  
recovered using utilities such as the MS-DOS Undelete command. To do this,  
you can use this program, QWIPE.BAS. It not only deletes files but also  
overwrites the files' contents. Although QWIPE.BAS isn't as fancy as The  
Norton Utilities' WipeFile program and other similar commercial software, it  
works well. 
 
To run the program from the DOS command line, change to the directory  
containing QWIPE.BAS, then type: 
 
QBASIC /RUN QWIPE 
 
 
The program starts by asking you the name of the file you want to wipe out;  
it then overwrites that file in 2K blocks.  The program actually overwrites  
the file three times, using zeros, then 1s, and then a random character.  
Finally, QWIPE.BAS changes the name of the overwritten file to a single  
letter, which makes it virtually impossible for a nosy user to utilize the  
filename to determine what the file contained originally. 
 
You may customize the program in several ways. You may change the characters  
used to overwrite the file, for one thing. To speed the file-wiping process,  
you may also reduce the number of times the file is overwritten to fewer than  
three. 
 
Because my hard disk is organized into 2K allocation units (also known as  
clusters), I set the block size to 2048 bytes (2K). If your hard drive is  
large, and you've partitioned it as one drive, the cluster size may be 4096  
bytes (4K) or larger. 
 
You should change the size of the block to match your hard disk's. (To find  
out the block size, run CHKDSK and read the line that tells the number of  
bytes in each allocation unit.)  Then, wherever 2048 appears in the program,  
change it to the size of allocation units for your hard drive. 
 
Finally, you may modify the program to read the file after the last write is  
carried out, which lets you verify that the file contains only the overwrite  
characters. If you do this, you should also add an error message that gives  
you the option of wiping the file again. 